# Capstone-project
The Data Incubator capstone proposal

Pollen for Pollinators

Worldwide the populations of pollinator species such as bees, butterflies, moths, and bats are in decline. Our food sources are dependent on pollinators, as is the integrity of ecosystems. Colony collapse disorder in honey bees resulted in massive losses of bee colonies with a very large impact in 2006. In more recent years, losses due to colony collapse disorder have lessened as beekeepers learn to manage symptoms of the crisis--so there is hope that we can turn this around! A critical support for honey bees and other threatened pollinators such as Monarch butterflies is to provide ample food sources in the form of pollen and nectar. Everyone with a little bit of outdoor space can participate in the effort to support pollinators by planting the right plants for their needs! But what to plant, and when? When will my plants flower and have I planted so that there will be a continuous food source through all seasons? How am I to find the answers to these questions and more? What if I want plants that are blue, or plants that will grow in partial shade? What is the right time to plant in my zip code?

These are questions we can answer with data. University extensions, such as Texas A&M University, maintain vast troves of data on plants that thrive in their areas, native plants, plants for specific pollinator species and more. The United States Department of Agricuture (USDA) makes available public data on over 250 species of pollinators and the plants they pollinate. More data is available by web scraping sites such as the Ladybird Johnson Wildflower Center at wildflower.org, and many others.

The deliverable will be a website that will ideally mature into an app. A gardener will be able to enter their location data by city or zip code which will limit the search space to plants that are hardy in that location. From there the gardener might want to search for plants to support a specific pollanator species, such as honey bees, Monarch butterflies, or bats. They may want to look for plants that bloom for that pollinator at a specific time of year. For instance, late summer is a rough time for honey bees because most of the summer flowers have finished blooming and the fall flowers have not yet begun. This combined with the summer heat can stress a bee colony. There is a word for this season in the life cycle of bees; it is referred to as "the dearth," when resouces are scarce and hives struggle. Bees will travel up to three miles to find food so every gardener has the ability to help bees get through the dearth and get ready for winter--if they have the data to know what to plant that will bloom and thrive when it is needed most. Or maybe I just want pink flowers that will bloom in partial shade in springtime in my area. That works too.

I have analyzed data for recent years for rates of colony collapse disorder by state, as well as honey production by state. Honey production is a good indicator of the health of a hive. In the first interation of the project I will ingest data for the areas currently most susceptible to colony collapse disorder in honey bees. At scale, the app will provide data for all of the United States and support at least a dozen key pollinator species, with the potential for more.

The next evolution of the project will be to include images of flowering plants. As any gardener knows, the seasons move quickly, so the mature app will allow the user to set alerts, for example, "When should I plant what plant species to have something blue flowering for bees in August?" The app will respond with push notifications, for example, "It is March in North Texas and it is time to plant Vitex that will bloom for bees from June through August."
The need for this is summed up in a quote from Michael Arnold, Ph.D., director of The Gardens at Texas A&M University and professor of landscape horticulture for the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, published April 1, 2021. He describes the need to plant for pollinators after the deep freeze in Texas in February disrupted flowering times. This top expert says “I may even make a spreadsheet and make my columns with the month of year and annotate these plants according to when they bloom to ensure I have things covering all the months needed for adequate pollinator support.” Even the experts are struggling to organize the data they need. There is a better solution than a clumsy spreadsheet.

This is a problem for which data science has a solution--one that I can create! The bees, butterflies, and bats of the world will be better off when we can use data science to support and enrich their habitats.

